feat(doc): add install guide (#289)
canonical/observability-stack: docs/how-to/deploy-and-manage/install.md

---
myst:
 html_meta:
   description: "Install the Canonical Observability Stack: preparation checklist covering sizing, networking, storage, and deployment options."
---

# How to install COS

## Preparation

Before deploying COS or COS Lite, work through the items below.

### COS flavor

The [flavor of COS](/explanation/overview/what-is-cos) to install depends on your use-case.
If you want to install on edge devices, then COS Lite is likely the right choice; otherwise
you should probably go with "full" COS.

```{mermaid}
graph LR

> subgraph env["Monitored environment"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subgraph env["Observed environment"]
```

opentelemetry-collector
end

subgraph k8s["K8s cluster"]
COS
end

subgraph pc["Public cloud"]
cos-alerter["COS Alerter"]
end

subgraph storage["Storage cluster"]
S3
end

opentelemetry-collector ---|telemetry| COS
COS --- S3
COS --- cos-alerter

> ```

Reviewer: We explain which COS flavour should we choose, and then we show a general diagram of just COS... this is weird

### Kubernetes cluster

Deploy COS on a high-availability Kubernetes cluster with at least 3 control plane nodes.

### Sizing

Use the [sizing guide](/reference/system-requirements) to determine the minimum hardware for your deployment.
If you don't yet know how much telemetry your workloads generate, start with [How to evaluate telemetry volume](/how-to/configure-and-tune/evaluate-telemetry-volume).

Follow the [storage best practices](/reference/storage) to set up a distributed storage backend with a replication factor of 3.
Do **not** use `hostPath` storage in production.

### Configure networking

Review the [networking best practices](/reference/networking) and ensure:

- A load balancer (for example, MetalLB) is available to give Traefik a stable IP.

> - Egress is open for Charmhub, the Juju OCI registry, and Snapcraft.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we specify the URLs?

### Plan for TLS

Production deployments should use TLS.
See [How to configure TLS encryption](/how-to/deploy-and-manage/configure-tls-encryption) for the available modes and what you need to prepare (for example, an external certificates provider).

### Authentication and authorization
Only the Grafana and Traefik charms support auth.
For exposing Grafana publicly, use two Traefik charms, one for internal connections, and another for external access, which will provide ingress to Grafana.

### Dedicated Juju controller and model

You should bootstrap a dedicated Juju controller and model just for COS.

> ## Create Terraform plan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Terraform plan

Create a `main.tf` file like this one:
```

```hcl
resource "juju_model" "cos" {
  name = "cos"
}

module "cos" {
  source = "git::https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack//terraform/cos?ref=tf-cos-3.0.n"
  risk         = "stable"
  model_uuid   = juju_model.cos.uuid
  s3_endpoint   = "http://IP_ADDRESS:PORT"
  s3_secret_key = "REPLACE_ME"
  s3_access_key = "REPLACE_ME"
}
```

where `.n` in `tf-cos-3.0.n` is the latest available patch version in the [COS tags](https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack/tags) list.

### Revision pins

> Deploying COS without revision pins, per component, will deploy the latest charms revisions in-track. Any subsequent Terraform plans will experience the same behaviour i.e., keeping COS up-to-date. However, if you require more stability, it is advised to pin the charm revisions of all components.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we recommend pin to `stable` is stability is a requirement?

Reviewer 2: We do have `risk = "stable"` in the TF module, but the problem is that if you deploy `stable` today you might get revision `123` and tomorrow you get `124`, which are both on the `stable` risk, but there is no guarantee that today's COS is the same as tomorrow's. That is what I was trying to clarify with this section

---
myst:
 html_meta:
   description: "Install the Canonical Observability Stack: preparation checklist covering sizing, networking, storage, and deployment options."
---

# How to install COS

## Preparation

Before deploying COS or COS Lite, work through the items below.

> ### COS flavor

Reviewer 2: Please sync with @michaeldmitry about the flavor because we had a chat incl. Simme and Pietro about this. Just to make sure we are aligned cross-team.

The [flavor of COS](/explanation/overview/what-is-cos) to install depends on your use-case.
If you want to install on edge devices, then COS Lite is likely the right choice; otherwise

> you should probably go with "full" COS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to install on edge devices, want to rely on local storage, or do not need high availability, then COS Lite is likely the right choice; otherwise
you should probably go with "full" COS.
```

```{mermaid}
graph LR

subgraph env["Monitored environment"]
opentelemetry-collector
end

subgraph k8s["K8s cluster"]
COS
end

subgraph pc["Public cloud"]
cos-alerter["COS Alerter"]

> end

Reviewer 3: Do we really need COS Alerter here? For the purposes of the install guide, this diagram would be informative even without having COS Alerter here.

subgraph storage["Storage cluster"]
S3
end

opentelemetry-collector ---|telemetry| COS
COS --- S3
COS --- cos-alerter
```

### Kubernetes cluster

Deploy COS on a high-availability Kubernetes cluster with at least 3 control plane nodes.

### Sizing

Use the [sizing guide](/reference/system-requirements) to determine the minimum hardware for your deployment.
If you don't yet know how much telemetry your workloads generate, start with [How to evaluate telemetry volume](/how-to/configure-and-tune/evaluate-telemetry-volume).

Follow the [storage best practices](/reference/storage) to set up a distributed storage backend with a replication factor of 3.

> Do **not** use `hostPath` storage in production.

Reviewer: Perhaps a brief explanation about "why not to use `hostPath`"?

### Configure networking

Review the [networking best practices](/reference/networking) and ensure:

- A load balancer (for example, MetalLB) is available to give Traefik a stable IP.
- Egress is open for Charmhub, the Juju OCI registry, and Snapcraft.

### Plan for TLS

Production deployments should use TLS.
See [How to configure TLS encryption](/how-to/deploy-and-manage/configure-tls-encryption) for the available modes and what you need to prepare (for example, an external certificates provider).

### Authentication and authorization
Only the Grafana and Traefik charms support auth.

> For exposing Grafana publicly, use two Traefik charms, one for internal connections, and another for external access, which will provide ingress to Grafana.

Reviewer: One minor suggestion:

```suggestion
Only the Grafana and Traefik charms support authentication.
To expose Grafana publicly, deploy two Traefik charms: one for internal connections and another for external access to provide ingress.
```

> For exposing Grafana publicly, use two Traefik charms, one for internal connections, and another for external access, which will provide ingress to Grafana.

Reviewer 2: Can we elaborate on the need for this or a topology diagram because I do not understand when or why to do this.

### Dedicated Juju controller and model

You should bootstrap a dedicated Juju controller and model just for COS.

## Create Terraform plan

```hcl

> module ... { ... }

Author: @MichaelThamm are we ready to put something here now?

Reviewer 2: Partially blocked by:
- https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack/pull/174

Reviewer 2: ```terraform
resource "juju_model" "cos" {
  name = "cos"
}

module "cos" {
  source = "git::https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack//terraform/cos?ref=tf-cos-3.0.n"
  risk         = "stable"
  model_uuid   = juju_model.cos.uuid
  s3_endpoint   = "http://IP_ADDRESS:PORT"
  s3_secret_key = "REPLACE_ME"
  s3_access_key = "REPLACE_ME"
}
```

where `n` in `tf-cos-3.0.n` is the latest available patch version in the [COS tags](https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack/tags)

Reviewer 2: Since this is a HowTo and not a Tutorial, I assume we can omit the provider def:
```hcl
terraform {
  required_version = ">= 1.5"
  required_providers {
    juju = {
      source  = "juju/juju"
      version = "~> 1.0"
    }
  }
}
```

```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Revision pins
Revision pinning is optional. With revision pins, subsequent `terraform apply` invocation will not refresh charms. Without revision pins, each `terraform apply` would refresh to the latest revision in track, if a new one released.
```
